Add Best Practice: Avoid Using Provider Get Outside of Task Action (#33509)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/best-practices/best_practices_tasks.adoc

=== Tags

`<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:tasks,#tasks>>`, `<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:caching,#caching>>`

[[avoid_provider_get_outside_task_action]]
== Do not call `get()`` on a Provider outside of a Task action
:keywords: tasks,inputs-and-outputs

> When configuring tasks and extensions do not call link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#get()[`get()`] on a provider, use link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#map(org.gradle.api.Transformer)[`map()`], or link:{javadocPath}/https://docs.gradle.org/nightly/javadoc/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#flatMap(org.gradle.api.Transformer)[`flatMap()`] instead.any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When configuring tasks and extensions do not call link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#get()[`get()`] on a provider, use link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#map(org.gradle.api.Transformer)[`map()`], or link:{javadocPath}/https://docs.gradle.org/nightly/javadoc/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#flatMap(org.gradle.api.Transformer)[`flatMap()`] instead
```

=== Explanation

> A provider should be evaluated as late as possible (if evaluated). Calling `get()` leads to evaluating it, which can have multiple side effects on your project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A provider should be evaluated as late as possible. 
Calling `get()` forces immediate evaluation, which can trigger unintended side effects, such as:
```

- The value of the provider becomes an input to configuration, causing potential configuration cache misses.

> - It may be too early, so you don’t actually use the final and correct value of the property. This may lead to painful and hard to debug ordering issues

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The value may be evaluated too early, meaning you might not be using the final or correct value of the property. This may lead to painful and hard to debug ordering issues.
```

> - It breaks build dependencies, making automatic task dependency wiring provided by Gradle impossible.

Reviewer: What do you think of:
```suggestion
- It breaks Gradle’s ability to build dependencies and to track task inputs and outputs, making automatic task dependency wiring impossible.
```

=== Example

Here is a task that writes an input `String` to a file:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/avoidProviderGetOutsideTaskAction/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=provider-get-task-setup]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/avoidProviderGetOutsideTaskAction/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=provider-get-task-setup]"]
====

==== Don't Do This

You could call `get()` at configuration time to set up this task:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/avoidProviderGetOutsideTaskAction/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=avoid-this]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/avoidProviderGetOutsideTaskAction/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=avoid-this]"]
====

> <1> *Reading the value of currentEnvironment at configuration time*: This value might change by the time the task start executing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> *Reading the value of `currentEnvironment` at configuration time*: This value might change by the time the task start executing.
```

> <2> *Reading the value of buildDirectory at configuration time*: This value might change by the time the task start executing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> *Reading the value of `buildDirectory` at configuration time*: This value might change by the time the task start executing.
```

==== Do This Instead

Instead, you should explicitly wire task inputs and outputs like this:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/avoidProviderGetOutsideTaskAction/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=do-this]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/avoidProviderGetOutsideTaskAction/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=do-this]"]
====

> <1> *Using `map()` to transform currentEnvironment*: `map` transform runs only when the value is read.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> *Using `map()` to transform `currentEnvironment`*: `map` transform runs only when the value is read.
```

> <2> *Using `file()` to create a new Provider<RegularFile>*: the value of the buildDirectory is only checked when the value of the provider is read.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> *Using `file()` to create a new `Provider<RegularFile>`*: the value of the `buildDirectory` is only checked when the value of the provider is read.
```

=== Tags

`<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:tasks,#tasks>>`, `<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:caching,#caching>>`

[[avoid_provider_get_outside_task_action]]
== Do not call `get()`` on a Provider outside of a Task action
:keywords: tasks,inputs-and-outputs

> When configuring tasks and extensions do not call link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#get()[`get()`] on a provider, use link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#map(org.gradle.api.Transformer)[`map()`], or link:{javadocPath}/https://docs.gradle.org/nightly/javadoc/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#flatMap(org.gradle.api.Transformer)[`flatMap()`] instead

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When configuring tasks and extensions do not call link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#get()[`get()`] on a provider, use link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#map(org.gradle.api.Transformer)[`map()`], or link:{javadocPath}/https://docs.gradle.org/nightly/javadoc/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#flatMap(org.gradle.api.Transformer)[`flatMap()`] instead.
```

> When configuring tasks and extensions do not call link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#get()[`get()`] on a provider, use link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#map(org.gradle.api.Transformer)[`map()`], or link:{javadocPath}/https://docs.gradle.org/nightly/javadoc/org/gradle/api/provider/Provider.html#flatMap(org.gradle.api.Transformer)[`flatMap()`] instead

Reviewer 2: 🤔 Is there something to be added here about this being an ideal, as some tasks (especially on 3rd party plugins) might not use lazy properties and therefor this might not always be possible?

Author: I would argue that you should never directly interact with tasks created by 3rd party plugins. Maybe we should have a separate best practice on that.

Additionally, if someone has no provider, then they are not going to this practice anyway.

=== Explanation

A provider should be evaluated as late as possible. 
Calling `get()` forces immediate evaluation, which can trigger unintended side effects, such as:

- The value of the provider becomes an input to configuration, causing potential configuration cache misses.
- The value may be evaluated too early, meaning you might not be using the final or correct value of the property. This may lead to painful and hard to debug ordering issues.

> - It breaks Gradle’s ability to build dependencies and to track task inputs and outputs, making automatic task dependency wiring impossible.

Reviewer 2: 🤔 I think this needs a little more detail, or a link to somewhere.  I don't think the fact that the Provider carries the task dependency, but calling `.get()` returns only the value, is completely obvious to many people.

Author: Added a link that explains it more.

> 

Reviewer 2: 🤔 I think this explanation needs a summary sentence at the end, after listing all the reasons not to trigger `get`.  Something like: "It is preferable to avoid explicitly evaluating a Provider at all, and deferring to `map/flatMap` to connect Providers to Providers implicitly."
